Let's say I wanna have branching
logic inside of my program here.
So I have this Boolean, skyIsBlue, which,
depending on the day in Seattle is not
always true, it's frequently gray.
Sometimes, there was one time it was red,
when there was forest fires in California,
so that would have made this false.
Anyway, so I can ask an if statement.
An if statement just is saying,
if this is true,
do a thing, if this is false,
do a different thing.
So I'm asking, inside of the parentheses
here, is this true or false?
Obviously I set this to be true up here,
so this is always gonna evaluate as true.
But you can also give it an else statement
to say, else the sky is not blue.
So for example, if it was gray in
Seattle today I could say false here,
and then it would say the sky is not blue,
or true, the sky is blue.
And that is how you do if statements.
Everything between these curly
braces here, Will be evaluated, so
I could also have another
console.log here.
Right, and it's gonna evaluate everything
here and nothing in here, which is great.
This allows me to set good branching
logic of doing something one time and
not doing it different time.
And I can also have anything here,
I can have 2 + 2 === 4, right?
So anything that can be
evaluated to true or
false can be evaluated here between these.
And then this is an arbitrary long block.
Something between these curly braces would
be called a block, it's a block of code.
So the first block would be evaluated,
the second one would not.
Okay, questions about that?
It's nice cuz it kind of reads like
you would expect it to, right?
If this is true,
then do this, else, do this.
So I actually do the exact
same thing down here,
you can see I'm very creative
with my thought process.
So some of you might be looking at that
triple equals and being, what is that?
It's actually just my font
shoving them together.
It's actually three equal signs put
together, but my font puts them together.
So that's a double equal right there,
and that's a triple equals there.
So you might ask me, Brian,
why are you using three equal signs?
Why can't I just do that,
right, one equal signs?
Well, if you remember, up here,
what is one equal sign do in JavaScript?
I want you to replace one equal sign
in your brain with is assigned, right?
So skyIsBlue is assigned true.
So if I'm doing this, 2 + 2 is assigned 4,
that doesn't make any sense,
I have to ask a question, right?
I have to say is this true or
false, because this if statement,
this block here, it has to end up
somehow being true or false, right?
So I can either put double equals,
which technically would work here.
But I'm gonna say just go ahead and
do a triple equals, and
there's no such thing as a four equals,
so that's fine.
I'll explain to you why that's important
just momentarily, just bear with me for
a second.
So 2 + 2 === 4,
this is asking the question,
is this side of this equal
to this side of this?
So up here I could ask,
is skyIsBlue === true?
It is.
Right, or is it equal to false?
It's not equal to false, so
this can be a little confusing, but
skyIsBlue is not equal to false, right?
So therefore, it's going to do this.
So that triple equals sign
just asked the question,
is the left side of this and
the right side of this the same thing?
Now, let's talk just a moment about
double equals versus triple equals,
do I have it done?
I do.
So single equals is assigned, And
this triple equals asks the thing,
is this both the same thing
as well as the same type?
So let's make this a string.
So by putting the quotes around this,
I've now made this a string, right?
Just like this could be any
arbitrary amount of things, but
let's make it an actual
just a string of 4.
If this is double equals,
it's gonna be true,
because it's the same thing even
though it's not the same type.
So this ends up being 4,
this is a string 4, right?
So those end up being true, and
double equals will say, hey,
as long as these end up
being the same thing,
even if they're different data types,
by all means, return true.
By putting triple equals here, That it's
gonna say, this is not the same data type,
these are not both numbers, therefore,
I'm not going to accept this.
I'm gonna say, always use triple equals,
unless you really intend
on using double equals.
You'll fall into some weird traps by using
double equals, it's called type coercion.
You'd never have to care about
that term that I just said,
you can just literally
throw it out of your brain.
And I don't really wanna get too
much into it because it's weird,
there's a lot of things that you wouldn't
expect to work the way that it does.
I'll just give you an example here,
is false == 0?
Yes, would you expect that?
Maybe, is false === 0?
No, that's my point, there's weird things.
By putting triple equals here,
you're making things very explicit, right?
This is what I'm telling that you're
writing code for your future self here.
You're being very explicit that I expect
this to be false, or expect this to be 0.
Okay, I think that's enough on that.
There's a bunch of JavaScript
kind of fundamental courses from
Kyle Simpson on Frontend Masters, and
he really digs into this kind of stuff.
So definitely check that
out if you're interested.
Let's talk about else ifs.
So you have friends at your party,
and let's say ten friends show up, and
then we can do branching logic on what
to do with how many friends you have.
So if you have 0 friends at your party,
then you get a lot of nachos to yourself.
It's definitely not a bad thing, I could
definitely go for some nachos right now.
If friends is less than or equal to 4,
it's the perfect amount
to play some Mario Kart.
And if you have more than that,
then you probably should turn
on some dance music, right?
So let's talk about this glyph for
a second,
this is an angle bracket,
so this is the less than.
Yeah, I always gotta think
of how you verbalize these.
Again, my font, if you put a less than and
then another equal sign next to it,
it puts that into one glyph, right?
So if less than or
equal to 4, then play this.
But what I'm trying to demonstrate to
you here is you can have multiple sets
of branching logic, right?
You can have, if it's 0,
do this, if it's less than or
equal to 4, then do this,
otherwise, do this.
So it's gonna ask multiple questions
before you end up wherever you are.
You also don't even have to
have this else here, right?
So if I just delete that,
what's it gonna do?
Nothing, right?
10 is not equal to 0, and
it's not less than or
equal to 4, so
it just skips everything here, right?
There's no else block,
the else block just basically says,
if nothing else is true, then run this.
And you can mess around this, like if I
put 3 here, what do I expect to happen?
All right, if I put 0 here,
what do I expect to happen?
If I put -1, what do I expect to happen?
Is that what you expected to happen?
Is -1 less than or equal to 4?
It is, so if you have -1
person attend your party, so
I guess if you leave your party, that's
the perfect amount to play Mario Kart.
I'm doing this just to show you how
bugs creep up in your code, right?
What happens if you get unexpected input?
Weird things start happening, and
that's how you get bugs in your code.
That's why that joke to me is always so
funny, like it's a QA person walks into
a bar, orders a beer, orders ten beers,
orders green beer, orders a cat, right?
And they just start trying
to do everything to try and
cause bugs in your code, that's exactly
demonstrating what's happening here.